SQLPLUS leiras


Elinditasa:  sqlplus  majd egy oracle felhasznaloi nev es egy jelszo

Kiadhatok SQL parancsok, SQLPLUS parancsok es PL/SQL blokkok

A beirt parancsok egy pufferbe kerulnek, amelynek tartalma szerkesztheto. 
Ha kiadunk egy ujabb SQL parancsot akkor az felulirja a puffer tartalmat. 
Az SQLPLUS parancsok nem kerulnek be a pufferbe es nem is befolyasoljak annak 
tartalmat. Sot ha mas modon paszirozunk be a pufferbe SQLPLUS parancsokat azok akkor 
sem fognak vegrehajtodni.
A pufferben egyszerre csak 1 SQL parancs lehet, amikor azt vegrehajtjuk. 
A parancs utan nem lehet pontosvesszo a pufferben. Tobb SQL parancsot csak egy 
parancsfile lefuttatasaval hajthatunk vegre. (START file) 
Ilyenkor minden SQL parancs utan pontosvesszo van a fileban.

Az SQL parancsokat akar tobb sorba is gepelhetjuk. A sor vegen csak ENTER-t kell adni.
Egy SQL parancs begepelese utan (akar tobb soba gepelve) a kovetkezoket tehetjuk:
pontosvesszot irunk                 ->       lefuttatja a parancsot.
/  (slash) egy uj sorba               ->       lefuttatja a parancsot
RUN                                        ->       listazza es lefuttatja a parancsot
Egy ures sor majd ENTER      ->       a parancs bekerul a pufferbe futtatas nelkul
Egy PL/SQL blokk begepelese utan egy ures sorba egy pontot gepelve a blokk bekerul a pufferbe.

Az SQLPLUS parancsokat is gepelhetjuk tobb sorba. Ekkor azonban a sor vegen "-" -et
kell begepelnunk. A parancs befejezese utan az az ENTER hatasara vegrehajtodik. 
Nem kell utana pontosvesszo, de ha teszunk az sem baj.

Az SQLPLUS kornyezet mukodeset befolyasoljak az un. sqlplus rendszervaltozok. 
Ezeket a SET paranccsal lehet beallitani es a SHOW paranccsal lehet az ertekuket lekerdezni. 
A SHOW ALL megmutatja az osszeset.

A legfontosabb SQLPLUS parancsok a kovetkezok:

Exit			kilepes az sqlplusbol
Clear buffer		puffer torlese
List			puffer tartalmanak listazasa
Save filenev		puffer tartalmanak fileba mentese  ( -> filenev.sql )
Get filenev		file betoltese a pufferbe  ( .sql )
Run			pufferben levo SQL parancs futtatasa
Edit			puffer szerkesztese      ( define _editor = vi )
Define [user_valtozo] 	user_valtozo definialasa illetve lekerdezese
Undefine  valtozo	megszunteti a definialt valtozot
Set valtozo=ertek		rendszer_valtozo ertekenek beallitasa
Show [valtozo | all]	rendszer_valtozo(k) ertekenek lekerdezese
Start filenev		parancsfile futtatasa  ( .sql )
Spool filenev		output filebairanyitasa   ( .lst )
Host [op_r_parancs]	operacios rendszer hivas az sqlplus-bol valo kilepes nelkul
Describe tnev		a tabla (view vagy synonym) oszlopait es tipusat listazza
Copy	...                    Adatok masolasa tablak (sot adatbazisok) kozott

Egy parancsfileban lehetnek SQL parancsok PL/SQL blokkok es SQLPLUS parancsok vegyesen. 
Az SQL parancsok utan pontosvesszo all. Letrehozhatunk egy bejelentkezesi 
parancsfilet (login.sql) es ennek tartalma automatikusan lefut miutan elinditottuk 
az sqlplus-t. Letezik egy globalis parancsfile is ( glogin.sql ) amit az oracle 
rendszergazda adhat meg es ami minden user eseten lefut.



Parancs	Leiras

@	Runs the specified command file. 

@@	Runs a nested command file. 

/	Executes the SQL command or PL/SQL block currently stored in the SQL buffer. 

ACCEPT	Reads a line of input and stores it in a given user variable. 

APPEND	Adds specified text to the end of the current line in the buffer. 

BREAK	Specifies where and how formatting will change in a report, or lists the current break definition. 

BTITLE	Places and formats a specified title at the bottom of each report page, or lists the current 
        BTITLE definition. 

CHANGE	Changes text on the current line in the buffer. 

CLEAR	Resets or erases the current value or setting for the specified option, such as BREAKS or COLUMNS. 

CLEAR BUFFER	Deletes all lines in the buffer

COLUMN	Specifies display attributes for a given column. Or, lists the current display attributes 
        for a single column or for all columns. 

COMPUTE	Calculates and prints summary lines, using various standard computations, on subsets of 
        selected rows. Or, lists all COMPUTE definitions. 

CONNECT	Connects a given username to ORACLE. 

COPY	Copies data from a query to a table in a local or remote database. 

DEFINE	Specifies a user variable and assigns it a CHAR value. Or, lists the value and variable type 
        of a single variable or all variables. 

DEL	Deletes the current line of the buffer. 

DESCRIBE  Lists the column definitions for the specified table, view, or synonym. 

DISCONNECT  Commits pending changes to the database and logs the current username off ORACLE, 
            but does not exit SQL*Plus. 

EDIT    Invokes a host operating system text editor on the contents of the specified file or on 
        the contents of the buffer. 

EXECUTE	Executes a single PL/SQL statement. 

EXIT	Commits all pending database changes, terminates SQL*Plus, and returns control to the operating system. 

GET	Loads a host operating system file into the buffer. 

HELP	Accesses the SQL*Plus help system. 

HOST	Executes a host operating system command  without leaving SQL*Plus. 

INPUT	Adds one or more new lines after the current line in the buffer. 

LIST	Lists one or more lines of the buffer. 

PAUSE	Displays an empty line followed by a line containing text, then waits for the user 
        to press [Return]. Or, displays two empty lines and waits for the user's response. 

PRINT	Lists the current value of a bind variable. 

PROMPT	Sends the specified message or a blank line to the user's screen. 

REMARK	Begins a comment in a command file. 

RUN	Lists and executes the SQL command or PL/SQL block currently stored in the SQL buffer. 

RUNFORM	Invokes a SQL*Forms application from within SQL*Plus. 

SAVE	Saves the contents of the buffer in a host operating system file (a command file). 

SET	Establishes an aspect of the SQL*Plus environment for your current session. 

SHOW	Lists the value of a SQL*Plus system variable. 


SPOOL	Stores query results in an operating system file and, optionally, sends the file to a 
        default printer. Also lists the current spooling status. 

SQLPLUS	Starts SQL*Plus from the operating system prompt. 

START	Executes the contents of the specified command file. 

TIMING	Records timing data for an elapsed period of time, lists the current timing area's 
        title and timing data, or lists the number of active timing areas.  

TTITLE	Places and formats a specified title at the top of each report page, or lists the current 
        TTITLE definition. 

UNDEFINE  Deletes a given user variable that you defined either explicitly (with the DEFINE command)
          or implicitly (with an argument to the START command). 

VARIABLE  Declares a bind variable which can be referenced in PL/SQL. 

WHENEVER OSERROR  Exits SQL*Plus if an OS command generates an error. 

WHENEVER SQLERROR  Exits SQL*Plus if a SQL command or PL/SQL block generates an error.  
